Market Place; Quick Ascent For Microsoft
By Vartanig G. Vartan
Published: May 13, 1987
FACEBOOK
TWITTER
GOOGLE+
E-MAIL
SHARE
PRINT
REPRINTS

WHEN shares of the Microsoft Corporation took off last week, rising 20 percent, some brokers and traders were skeptical that the stock could hold its gains.

Ending the week at more than $126 a share, the stock was trading at about 80 times the $1.56 a share earned by the computer software company in the fiscal year ended last June 30. Even if one figures the price/earnings ratio on a calendar year basis, Microsoft was selling at about 60 times earnings. Its rise has been quick and steep. Last week the stock, traded over the counter, jumped $21.50. Some of the run-up was caused by vague rumors of a takeover, and some of it may have been due to covering by short sellers. Three weeks ago the stock was trading below $100 a share; a year ago it was first offered to the public at $21. $ ? * * *

''The stock is being bought by a lot of 28-year-old money managers who have never seen a down market,'' said one trader during the Microsoft run-up. ''But they will learn.''

Some of them may be learning this week. The stock dipped to $118.50 yesterday, partly because Seagate Technology got a contract that Microsoft was thought to be in the running for. But many analysts say Microsoft, whose MS-DOS personal computer operating system dominates the industry, may eventually be worth a lot more than $126.''Microsoft is a unique play,'' said Bruce Johnston, who follows the company for First Boston. ''It's basically a monopoly - and a sustainable monopoly.'' About 95 percent of the International Business Machines Corporation's personal computers use the MS-DOS operating system. The other 5 percent primarily use some variant of UNIX, an operating system developed by Bell Laboratories. But Microsoft is also covered there: It owns 80 percent of the UNIX market for personal computers through a licensing deal.

''A monopoly position in a rapidly expanding market is nice to have,'' Mr. Johnston commented. Many analysts expect the PC market to grow vigorously for the rest of the decade as people become more comfortable with PC's, prices come down and software for many practical applications - such as desktop publishing - is developed. * * *

Mr. Johnston described an operating system as ''the unconscious mind of a computer.'' It is analogous to the human body's autonomic nervous system, which controls the body's involuntary functions, such as breathing.

On the other hand, ''application'' software (such as a spreadsheet or a word processing program) allows the computer to perform specific tasks.

Microsoft's prospects brightened when I.B.M. endorsed Microsoft's new OS/2 operating system for the next-generation IBM Personal System/2 PC's, setting off a wave of buy recommendations.

The reason: Microsoft, which is based in Redmond, Wash., makes a profit of about $25 to $30 on each MS-DOS sale to a PC user; on an OS/2 sale, the figure is more like $75 to $100.

And ''the next generation operating system is guaranteed to sell,'' said John C. Maxwell, a Dillon, Read analyst. He estimates that Microsoft will earn $2.70 a share in the present fiscal year and $3.40 in the 1988 fiscal year. Mr. Johnston's projects $2.70 and $3.80, respectively. Some forecasts run higher. Shearson Lehman Brothers, for instance, expects $2.80 a share in the 1987 fiscal year and $4 next year.

With such earnings anticipated, Microsoft's stock price becomes more understandable, analysts argue. Mr. Maxwell said that ''companies in the software industry sell at a significant premium'' because of their high growth rate and high return on equity. $ ? * * *

Microsoft's latest results were strong. The company reported that it earned $19.1 million, or 69 cents a share, in the quarter ended March 31, up 80.2 percent from $10.6 million, or 42 cents a share, a year earlier.

Analysts are also encouraged by Microsoft's success with its application software for the popular Macintosh, the flagship model of Apple Computer Inc., the other major PC manufacturer.

The run-up in Microsoft's shares generated conjecture that someone was accumulating the stock. But that seems unlikely, most analysts say, since Microsoft's founder and chairman, William Gates, owns 11 million of the 25.5 million shares outstanding. Mr. Maxwell of Dillon, Read said, ''An unfriendly takeover could probably be excluded at this juncture.'' Both he and Mr. Johnston at First Boston say a stock split is more likely.

What could go wrong for Microsoft? The economy, of course, could sour. And analysts say the introduction of the new OS/2 system could be delayed. ''Or it will be too complicated, and people won't buy it,'' Mr. Johnston suggested.