BUSINESS TECHNOLOGY; I.B.M. COMPATIBILITY IS AT A CROSSROADS BIG BLUE VS. THE BULGARIAN MEGABITE
By DAVID E. SANGER
Published: March 11, 1987
FACEBOOK
TWITTER
GOOGLE+
E-MAIL
SHARE
PRINT
SINGLE PAGE
REPRINTS

EVER since I.B.M. introduced the PC six years ago, people who use personal computers have needed to know only one thing about I.B.M. compatibility: Either they had it or they didn't. Those who did could share software with other compatibles in the office or at home; those who didn't, couldn't.

Within two years, however, it appears there will be at least two standards of I.B.M. compatibility, both endorsed by the International Business Machines Corporation. And the two will be - well, mostly incompatible.

''Let's face it, life's been simple,'' said William Gates, chairman of the Microsoft Corporation, which created the disk operating system (MS-DOS) that is the main determinant of I.B.M. compatibility. ''We're about to make it a lot more complicated for everyone.''

The problem, Mr. Gates said at a recent computer conference in Phoenix, is that MS-DOS has run out of steam.

In a world where applications software is getting more powerful and complex - advanced spreadsheets, data bases, word processing and scientific programs, for example -MS-DOS is limited to working with programs and data in chunks of 640 kilobytes or less. Some rival operating systems are already capable of dealing with several times that much data at once, allowing programs to do more, more quickly and with less effort on the part of the user.

More important, MS-DOS was designed with individual computer users in mind, not groups of users sharing computer resources on a network. In other words, it is fairly useless for true office automation.

Nor was MS-DOS built for an age when PC's must share information with computers many times their size, picking up some processing tasks themselves and farming out others to the minicomputers and mainframes in what programmers call a distributed computing environment.

So at Microsoft's offices in Bellevue, Wash., programmers are busily at work on ''New DOS,'' scheduled for delivery in early 1989. And Mr. Gates, the company's founder and chief executive, made no effort to paper over the seriousness of the change for PC users.

Computer makers ''will have to make a choice,'' said Mr. Gates, the 31-year-old programmer who made an estimated $350 million when Microsoft went public a year ago. ''They will have to decide whether to use existing DOS, or the New DOS. And many of the applications for the New DOS will not run on the old.''

The impetus for all this is not just a growing frustration with MS-DOS. It is also the imminent introduction of the first I.B.M. machines based on the Intel 80386, a much faster, more flexible microprocessor that the company hopes will breathe life into an aging family of PC's.

The 80386 computers, expected to be announced by I.B.M. next month, will run on the current versions of DOS. But the old DOS cannot exploit most of the chip's best features.

One Microsoft programmer, disgust rising in his voice, likened running a new PC on the current operating system to ''putting Orville Wright in the cockpit of an F-111.''

As described by Mr. Gates, New DOS will not run in personal computers using the Intel 8088 or 80286 chips - in other words, every I.B.M.-compatible personal computer in existence except for early 80386 entries from Compaq and a few other companies. Nor will it run on machines that do not have a high-capacity hard disk drive, for storing data, or on any machine with less than 1,024 kilobytes (one megabyte) of internal memory.

But New DOS will pave the way for a new generation of programs, and already software houses are lining up.

At Ashton-Tate, for example, there are two development teams at work. One is laboring to improve dBase III, the top-selling data base manager, and another is starting from scratch, developing an entirely new program.

Lotus is also reportedly at work on programs designed specifically for the new generation.

Whether all this is a good thing depends on how one uses a computer. ''Power users'' who are pushing the limits of the existing technology will likely welcome the arrival of far more powerful programs, capable of making more use of artificial intelligence techniques and of being linked to bigger machines. The difference in operating systems will be an inconvenience, but worth the price.

On the other hand, most normal users of PC's may never realize any benefits from the new operating system. And they will work in offices where the distinctions in operating systems, murky and confusing even now, are nothing but trouble. ''It has the potential of stifling innovation,'' said Jerry Kaplan, the chief technologist at Lotus, ''because more and more people spend time worrying about compatibility than about really interesting new programs.''

Even as the operating systems get more complicated, I.B.M. insists it is moving toward the high ground of simplicity. Over the last few weeks, bit by bit, it has made known its plans for a set of guidelines and protocols called Systems Application Architecture, which will make it possible for a single program to run on every I.B.M. machine from a personal computer to a mainframe.


The idea is patterned after I.B.M.'s Systems Network Architecture in the 1970's. That was a set of communications standards involving both hardware and software, to which all I.B.M. offerings are supposed to adhere. (The original PC, increasingly the out-of-step duckling, does not use S.N.A., but the new models reportedly will.) Systems Applications Architecture will use a uniform set of ''user interfaces,'' keyboard commands and the organization of data on the screen, to make a user feel at home no matter what machine is being used. The question is whether I.B.M. can impose the discipline, on itself and on the hundreds of outside software companies that write programs for its machines, to really make life any easier.

For years the Federal Government and the Soviet bloc have played a cat-and-mouse game with computer technology. With elaborate export control lists, the United States attempts to insure that nothing more powerful than an Apple II slips through to Eastern Europe. Meanwhile, the Defense Department and intelligence agencies go to some lengths to assess Soviet bloc equipment.

Those countries are usually eager for the United States to see their home-grown handiwork, hoping that if they can show that they already understand the technology, the American export controls may be relaxed. Such was apparently the case a year ago when American officials got their hands on a Bulgarian-made 200-megabyte disk drive.

''We didn't have the expertise to evaluate it, so we shipped the thing to a large company we do a lot of business with,'' said one senior Government official, warming to his story. The company, others familiar with the tale quickly volunteered, was the Federal systems division of the International Business Machines Corporation.

For weeks I.B.M.'s engineers tinkered and toyed, but even the technological firepower of the world's largest computer company could not make the Bulgarian disk drive go whir and click. Finally I.B.M. did what any of its customers would do: It called for service.

''A few weeks later these two Bulgarians show up,'' the official, who insisted on anonymity, continued. ''One of them is a woman, a rather large woman actually, who had very few tools. But she started taking the drive apart, pulling out wires with her bare hands.''

And as astonished I.B.M. technicians looked on, ''she started stripping the wires with her teeth,'' he said.

By the end of the day, the disk drive that I.B.M. could not fix was up and humming. As the strong-toothed Bulgarian packed up to go, the I.B.M. engineers presented her with a parting gift: a pair of wire strippers. - DAVID E. SANGER
