When the exiles had lived in the Dandaka forest for a long time, the forest- hermits living there asked Rama for protection against the rakshasas (demons). Rama promises this protection, and from that time is incessantly engaged in battles against these monsters. The man-eating giant Viradha is the first to be killed. Most important is their encounter with Shurpanakha (“she who has claws as big as winnowing baskets”). This hideous ogre falls in love with Rama and makes amorous proposals to him. He refers her to his brother Lakshmana (who is not yet married). Lakshmana scornfully rejects her and reviles her. Full of rage, she is about to swallow Sita, when Lakshmana cuts off her ears and nose. She flees howling to her brother Khara, marches against Rama with 14,000 rakshasas.
Rama slays them all. After Khara too has fallen, Shurpanakha flees to Lanka, a fabulous land beyond the ocean, and incites her frightful brother Ravana to avenge her. At the same time she describes to him the beauty of Sita in exquisite terms, and incites him to gain possession of her and to make her his wife. Propelled by lust and anger, Ravana races off through the air in his golden chariot, across the ocean to where his friend, the demon Marichi, is living as an powerful ascetic.
With Maricha’s aid, and through magical deception, be succeeds in parting Sita from her protectors and abducting her. As he bears her away on his chariot through the air, Sita cries loudly for help. The vulture Jatayus, an old friend of Dasharatha’s, comes flying along. He manages to smash Ravana’s chariot, but is finally overcome. The demon catches Sita in his claws and flies away again with her. As she is borne flying through the air, the flowers fall from her hair, and the jeweled bands slip from her feet, falling to the ground. The trees, their branches rustling in the wind, seem to call to her: “Don’t be afraid!” The lotuses droop their heads, as if mourning for their beloved friend. Lions, tigers, and other beasts of the forest run raging behind her shadow on the ground. Even the hills, tears cascading down their faces, their peaks upraised like beseeching hands to the sky, appeared to moan for Sita. And the sun itself grew pale, its radiance dimmed, at the sight of Sita being carried away, as if lamenting: “There is no more justice, no truth, no righteousness, no innocence, if Ravana steals Sita, the wife of Rama.” 
But Ravana carried her off across the ocean to Lanka, where he shut her in his harem. Then he conducts her round his palace, shows her all its splendors, and describes to her the immeasurable riches and marvels over which he rules. With coaxing words he tried to persuade her to become his wife. But Sita answered indignantly that she would never break faith with Rama by allowing him to embrace her.
Enraged, Ravana warned that, if she does not yield herself to him within twelve months, he would enjoy her in another fashion: he would have her cut in pieces by his cooks and he would eat her for breakfast. Then he imprisoned her in a grotto, and left her under the strict guard of the ogresses.
Meanwhile Rama and Lakshmana returned to find their hut empty. In vain they seek Sita in the forest. In horror, Rama raises a bitter lament, searching vainly in the forest for Sita. He questions the trees, the rivers, the hills, and the animals, but none can give him news of Sita. At last they find the flowers and ornaments that fell from Sita as she passed; then they come upon the ruins of Ravana’s chariot, his weapons, and the signs of a struggle. Rama fears that Sita has been killed, and in his delirium, he declares his intention of destroying the whole world: He will fill the air with his arrows, stay the wind in its course, annihilate the sun’s rays and envelop the earth in darkness, hurl down the summits of the mountains, dry up the lakes, destroy the ocean, uproot the trees, even destroy the gods themselves if they do not give him back his Sita. At last, Lakshmana is able to calm his raving and to continue the search. They come upon the dying vulture Jatayus, who relates to them what has occurred, but dies in the middle of his story. Wandering toward the south the brothers encounter a roaring, headless monster, Kabandha, whom they release from a heavy curse. In gratitude, he advises Rama to ally himself with the monkey-king Sugriva, who will be helpful to him in the recovery of Sita.