When Dasharatha felt old age approaching, he resolved to appoint his favorite son Rama as heir to the throne, and caused Vasishtha to make all the necessary preparations for the consecration. When the hunchbacked maid of Queen Kaikeyi had heard of this, she reported it to her mistress, and she urges her mistress to bring about the elevation of her own son Bharata to the throne, in place of Rama. The king had once promised to grant her any two wishes, which she had not yet asked for. Now she made her requests: the banish Rama for fourteen years and appoint her son Bharata as heir to the throne. The king was tortured by grief and regret, uncertain of what to do, but when Rama learned of the matter, he unhesitatingly accepted his banishment, so that his father should not be guilty of breaking his word. In vain his mother Kausalya and his brother Lakshmana tried to dissuade him, but he insisted that it is his highest duty (dharma) to help his father to keep his word. He informed his wife of his decision, asking her to be kind to Bharata, to live piously and chastely Dasharatha’s court, and to serve his father and his mothers obediently. But Sita answered him in an eloquent speech on the duties of a woman, declaring that as a devoted wife (pati-vrata) nothing could prevent her from following him into exile in the wilderness.
Rama describes to her all the terrors and dangers of the forest, but she remains firm. Just as Savitri once followed her husband Satyavan even to the world of the dead to reclaim him from Yama, king of the underworld, so, she says, will she follow him wherever he must go. Nor can the faithful Lakshmana be dissuaded from joining his brother in exile. And so, stripped of all the trappings of royalty, clothed only in garments of bark, the three went off alone into the wilderness while all of Ayodhya mourned.
King Dasharatha could not bear this separation from his son. A few days after Rama’s banishment, the king awoke from uneasy sleep about midnight. He suddenly remembered a crime he had committed in his youth, and tells Kausalya how be had once, while hunting, he had killed a young man by mistake, and how the boy’s blind father had solemnly cursed him to die of grief at the loss of his own son. Before long, the curse had been fulfilled.
After the death of the king, Bharata, who had been staying in Rajagriha, was called to the capital and invited by his mother Kaikeyi, and by the royal counselors, to ascend the throne. But Bharata vigorously refuses, objecting that sovereignty belongs by right to Rama. With a great retinue he sets out to find his brother.
Meanwhile, Rama, camping in the Chitrakuta hills, is just describing, the beauties of the landscape to Sita, when clouds of dust are seen in the distance and the noise of an approaching army is heard. Lakshmana climbs up a tree and sees the army of Bharata drawing near. Believing it to be a hostile attack, and he becomes enraged. But then Bharata halts his army and approaches alone. He throws himself at Rama’s feet, and the brothers embrace one another.
Now Bharata, with many tears and reproaches against himself and his mother Kaikeyi, reports to Rama the death of his father, and asks him to return and begin his reign. Rama says be could not reproach either him or his mother; but that which his father had commanded, must even now be dear to him, and he will never depart from his decision to spend fourteen years in the forest. In vain are all the entreaties of Bharata, who reminds him of the departure of their father.
Rama, with many lamentations, offers the funeral libation for the departed one, but remains firm in his resolve. Rama comforts his mourning brother in a magnificent speech on the natural, necessary transitoriness of existence, and the inevitability of death, which makes every lament seem unreasonable.
The counselors, too, come in order to invite Rama to begin his reign. One of these, Jabali, a great heretic and skeptic, tries to dispel Rama’s moral scruples. Everyone lives only for himself, he says, one need not trouble about father and mother; death is the end of all things, the talk of a Beyond is only spread by venal and cynical priests, in order to secure their livelihood; therefore he should only consult his common-sense and ascend the throne. Rama vigorously rejects these nihilistic teachings. But even the arguments of the pious priest Vasishtha fail change his mind. And finally Bharata is compelled to consent to conduct affairs for Rama. Rama gives him his sandals as a symbol of sovereignty, and Bharata returns to Ayodhya, Where Rama’s sandals are solemnly placed on the throne as the representatives of the king, while he himself transfers his residence to Nandigrama, in order from there to manage the affairs of the country for Rama, as his representative.
