In the land of the Kosalas (north of the Ganges), in the city of Ayodhya, there ruled a king named Dasharatha, who was mighty and wise, but still childless. The court advisor urged him to offer an imperial horse-sacrifice. The sage Rishyashringa, as the chief priest of this great sacrifice, includes an especially powerful offering rite that can cause the begetting of sons. When the offerings had been placed in the fire, the remnants were divided between the kings wives, who ate them. Just at that time the gods in heaven were much troubled by Ravana, the ten-headed demon king of Lanka. They therefore turned to Lord Vishnu, begging him to take human form in order to defeat Ravana. Vishnu agrees and resolves to be born on earth as the son of Dasharatha. So, safter the horse-sacrifice was concluded, the three wives of King Dasharatha bore him four sons: Kausalya bore Rama (in whom Vishnu had incarnated himself), Kaikeyi bore Bharata, Sumitra bore Lakshmana and Shatrughna. Of these four princes Rama, the eldest, was his father’s favorite, and from his youth, Lakshmana was deeply devoted to his elder brother. He was like Rama’s second self, and fulfilled all his wishes even before they were uttered. As the grew up princes, were trained in all the arts, and Rama excelled in everything.
When the princes had grown to manhood, the great sage Vishvamitra came to the court of Dasharatha, complaining that demons were disrupting the worship at his hermitage with their persistent attacks. At his request, Rama and Lakshmana, went forth with him to slay the demons, for which they were rewarded with magical weapons. Vishvamitra later accompanied the princes to the court of King Janaka of Videha. Janaka had a daughter named Sita (“Furrow”), so named because she had come forth out of the earth when the king was ploughing in a field. Janaka had raised her as a daughter, and now was considering the question of whom she should marry. The king possessed a wonderful bow, fit for a god. He had announced that he would give his daughter Sita in marriage only to the man who could draw the bow. Many princes had already failed, hardly able even to lift it, but when Rama’s turn came, be bent it so easily that it snapped in two. Highly delighted the king gives him his daughter in marriage. Dasharatha was summoned, and so the marriage of Rama and Sita was sumptuously celebrated. And so Rama lived happily with is devoted wife Sita for many years in Ayodhya.