One day Rama is informed that the people are expressing, their disapproval at his having received Sita back after she (during her abduction) had sat in the lap of Ravana; it was feared that this might have a bad effect on the morals of the women in the land. The model king Rama is very sad about this; he cannot bear the reproach that he is setting the people a bad example, and requests his brother Lakshmana to take Sita away and desert her in the forest. With a heavy heart Lakshmana takes her on his chariot, leads her to the Ganges. On the further bank of the river, he discloses to her that Rama has rejected her on account of the suspicions of the people. In deep grief, but yet full of submission to her fate, Sita simply sends Rama her best wishes. Soon after, some hermit-boys find the weeping Sita in the forest and lead her to the hermitage of the ascetic Valmiki. The latter delivers her into the protection of hermit-women. After some time she gives birth, in the hermitage, to the twins Kusha and Lava.
Several years pass. The children have grown up and become pupils of the ascetic bard Valmiki. At this time Rama organizes a great horse-sacrifice, at which Valmiki and his pupils are present. He instructs two of them to recite, in the sacrificial assembly, the Ramayana composed by him. All listen with rapture to the wonderful recitation. But Rama soon discovers that the two youthful singers Kusha and Lava, who recite the poem to the accompaniment of the lute, are sons of Sita. Then he sends messengers to Valmiki and asks him to arrange that Sita may purify herself by an oath before the sacrificial assembly. The next morning Valmiki brings Sita, and, in a solemn speech, the great ascetic declares that she is pure and innocent, and that her children, the twin-brothers Kusha and Lava, are the true sons of Rama. Thereupon Rama declares that, though he is satisfied with the words of Valmiki, lie still desires that Sita should purify herself by means of an oath. Then all the gods descended from heaven. But Sita, with downcast glance and folded hands, said: “As truly as I have never, even with one thought, contemplated another man than Rama, may Goddess Earth open her arms to me! As truly as I have always, in thought, word and deed, honored only Rama, may Goddess Earth open her arms to me! As I have here spoken the truth and never known any other man than Rama, may Goddess Earth open her arms to me!”
Scarcely was the oath finished, than there arose out of the earth a heavenly throne, borne on the heads of snake-deities, and Mother Earth, seated on the throne, embraced Sita, and vanished with her into the depths. In vain Rama now adjures the Goddess Earth to give him back his Sita. Only the god Brahma appears and comforts him with the hope of reuniting with her in heaven. Soon afterwards Rama gives up the government to his two sons Kusha and Lava, and himself enters heaven, where be again becomes Vishnu.