Rama praises Hanuman for his success, and embraces him, but he despairs of getting across the ocean. Sugriva suggests constructing a bridge to Lanka. Hanuman gives an exact description of Ravana’s citadel and its fortification, and declares that the best of the monkey-warriors would be able to take it. So Rama commands that the army shall be prepared for the march, and soon the vast army sets out southwards towards the coast.
When the news of the approaching army of monkeys had reached Lanka, Ravana summoned his counselors, all great and powerful Rakshasas, to a council. Now while all the other relatives and counselors urged Ravana in boasting speeches to fight, Vibhishana, Ravana’s brother, points to unfavorable omens and advises him to return Sita. Ravana is much enraged at this, and accuses him of envy and ill-will; relatives, he says, are always the worst enemies of a king, and hero. Feeling deeply offended by his brother, Vibhishana renounces him, flies across the ocean with four other Rakshasas and allies himself with Rama. On the advice of Vibhishana, Rama appeals to the Ocean-god himself to aid him in crossing the sea. The latter calls the monkey Nala, the son of the divine master builder Vishvakarman, and instructs him to bridge the ocean. At Rama’s command, the monkeys bring rocks and trees. In a few days, a bridge is built over the ocean, and the whole of the great army passes over to Lanka.
Now Ravana’s town is surrounded by the army of monkeys. Ravana gives the command for a general sortie. A battle takes place, also many cases of single combat between the chief heroes of the two fighting armies. Lakshmana, Hanuman, Angada and the bear-king Jambavan are the most prominent fellow- combatants of Rama, while on Ravana’s side, his son Indrajit is the most conspicuous. The latter is versed in all magic arts and knows how to make himself invisible at moment.
Thus, on one occasion, he inflicts dangerous wounds on Rama and Lakshmana. But in the night, on the advice of the bear-king Jambavan, the monkey Hanuman flies to Mount Kailasa, in order to fetch four particularly powerful healing herbs. As these herbs are concealed, the monkey simply takes the whole mountain-peak with him and carries it to the battle-field, where, through the fragrance of the healing herbs, Rama, Lakshmana and all the wounded are immediately healed. Then Hanuman puts the mountain back into its place.
On another occasion, Indrajit, versed in magic, comes out of the city carrying, on his war-chariot a magically produced image of Sita, which he ill-treats and beheads before the eyes of Hanuman, Lakshmana and the monkeys. Horrified, Hanuman reports to Rama that Sita is killed; Rama falls into a swoon. Lakshmana breaks into lamentations and utters a blasphemous speech with bitter complaints against Fate that has no regard to virtue but be is soon enlightened by Vibhishana that the whole affair is only a delusion produced by Indrajit. Finally, Indrajit is killed by Lakshmana after a violent duel.
Furious at the death of his son, Ravana himself now appears on the field of battle. A dreadful duel between Rama and Ravana takes place, continuing day and night. The gods themselves come to Rama’s aid, especially Indra with his chariot and his projectiles. But every time Rama strikes off one of Ravana’s heads, a new head grows again. At last he succeeds in piercing Ravana’s heart with a weapon created by the god Brahma himself. There is great rejoicing in the army of the monkeys, and wild flight of the Rakshasas.
Ravana is solemnly buried and Vibhishana is installed as king in Lanka by Rama. Only now does Rama send for Sita, and proclaim to her the joyous news of the victory — but then, in the presence of all the monkeys and Rakshasas, he rejects her. He declares that he has had his revenge for the ignominy he has had to suffer, but he will have no more to do with her; for he could no longer accept as his wife a woman who has sat on the lap of another man, and who has been looked at with lustful eyes by another. Then Sita raises a bitter complaint against Rama’s unjust suspicions, and asks Lakshmana to erect a pyre: for now nothing remained for her but to enter the fire. Rama gives his consent,the pyre is erected and lighted, and Sita, invoking Agni, the fire god, as witness of her innocence, rushes into the flames. Then Agni arises out of the burning pyre with the uninjured Sita and delivers her to Rama, assuring him, in a solemn speech, that she has always kept her faith with him, and even in the palace of the Rakshasa remained pure and innocent. Thereupon Rama declares that he himself had never had any doubts concerning Sita’s innocence, but that it was necessary to prove it before the eyes of the people.
Now Rama and his people, accompanied by Hanuman and the monkeys, return to Ayodhya, where they are received with open arms by Bharata, Shatrughna, and the mothers. They enter amidst the rejoicing of the populace. Rama is consecrated as king, and rules happily and for the welfare of his subjects.